The exam has about 34 questions that cover all topics in this course.  There are 10 questions on SQL that require you to use the WORLD database in MySQL.  If you don't have this database on your system,  download and run the world-schema.sql from here Course Resources

Review these topics for the final exam

SQL
know how to code seleect including subqueries,  grouping,  order by. 
   -- simple select (ASSIGNMENT1)
   SELECT * from table;
   -- group by (ASSIGNMENT1)
   SELECT region.regionid, region.regionname, COUNT(store.storeid)
   FROM region JOIN store ON region.regionid = store.regionid
   GROUP BY region.regionid;
   -- subqueries (ASSIGNMENT2)
   SELECT categoryname, regionname, totalsales
   FROM category_region outerp
   WHERE totalsales =
         (SELECT max(innerp.totalsales)
         FROM category_region innerp
         WHERE innerp.categoryname=outerp.categoryname);
   -- order by (ASSIGNMENT2)
   SELECT product.productid, product.productname, vendor.vendorname
   FROM product NATURAL JOIN vendor
   WHERE product.productprice < (SELECT AVG(product.productprice) FROM product)
   ORDER BY product.productid;
 
know how to code a create table statements
   CREATE TABLE test (
      ID INT AUTO INCREMENT
      CUST VARCHAR
   );


ER design
how to identify a 1:Many and Many:Many relationship in a ER diagram 
   One to many would be like book to library example. There are many books to one library 

How to translate entity attributes and relationship attributes in an ER diagram into SQL create table statements.
   -- check in with team 

Given a table definition,  how to check for normal form and fix any problems by splitting the table into multiple tables
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J-drts33N8g&t=294s
   Check for normalization. The 3 forms of normalization
   First form 
      All rows must be unique (no duplicate rows)
      Each cell must only contain a single value (not a list)
      Each value should be non divisible (can't be split any further)
   Second Form 
      Database nust be in first form 
      non partial dependency (all non prime attributes should be fully functionally dependent on the canidate key)
   Third Form 
      Must be in first and second form 
      No transistive dependency (All fields must only be determined by the primary/composite key, not by other keys)


JDBC coding
know how to code prepared statements, use results sets to retrieve data values, and commit a transaction.
   --Prepared statement (Project2-controller doctor)
   PreparedStatement ps = con.prepareStatement("select name, specialty, practice_since from doctor where id=?");
   --Result set (Project2 - Controllerdoctor)
   ResultSet rs = ps.executeQuery();
      if (rs.next()) {
         doctor.setName(rs.getString(1));
         doctor.setPractice_since_year(rs.getString(3));
         doctor.setSpecialty(rs.getString(2));
         model.addAttribute("doctor", doctor);
         return "doctor_edit";
   --Commit (Project2 - Controllerdoctor)
      ask team about commit 


know to code setAutoCommit to use multi statement transactions
   ask team about autocommit


Disk architecture: (Module 5 slides)
know what access time and data transfer time are 
   Acess time: ~4 ms = 0.004 sec (Time to move the head to the proper track)
   Data transfer: ~ 200mbs/sec (Amount of data (bytes) that can be read from disk into memory per second)


what is the difference between doing 100 random read operations versus 100 sequential read operations.  which one will be faster?  and why?


Index
review B+ Tree visualization exercise from week 5.  How is the B+ Tree searched to lookup a key value?

Transactions (review slides from week 5)

What do the letters ACID mean.
   A: Atomic behavior - all or none 
      A single SQL statement is always atmoic 
      Multiple SQLs can be grouped into a transcation 
         START TRANSACTION statement 
         COMMIT statement 
      The transation is atomic 
   C: Consistency of database 
      a database may be inconsistent during the transaction 
   I: Isolation - concurrent programs dont interfere with other 
      Equivalent to running programs serially one at a time 
   D: Durability - changes once committed are not lost even when system crashes 

How do you start, end, and abort a transaction when coding in Java using JDBC
   -check

Concurrency -- review slides from week 5 - listen to lecture again 
Be able to describe how the concurrency problems of lost update, inconsistent read, inconsistent write and phantoms come about
   -- Lost update: the table should have updated 2 times but only recorded one of the updates 
   -- inconsistent Read: Does not properly read and input does not match output? 

Know about S and X locks and which locks are compatible and which locks require a requester to wait
   S: Shared mode - with shared mode access, a transaction can read but not write a data item 
      Trans 1 holds S lock on row A : trans 2 can be granted an s lock on row a, but must wait for X lock on A 
   X: exclusive mode - a transaction can read and write a data item 
      trans 1 holds x lock on row A : trans 2 must wait for any lock on row A

Know about the different isolation levels:  Read Committed, Repeatable Read and Serializable  in terms of lock usage and which concurrency problems are solved and not solved by each level 


Snapshot isolation -- review assignment from week 5 

NoSQL  - review slides from week 6  
Know about Replication and leader, follower and which one are write requests directed to, and which one are read requests directed to
   

Know about partitioning of databases and partitioning by key hash value and by key range.

What is wrong with the SQL data model of tables with rows and columns that make companies use a NoSQL database instead?

map/reduce - what is the purpose of the map function?  the reduce function? 

how do you determine the key in a  map reduce operation

what characteristics of traditional database are missing in NoSQL databases


OLAP
Data Warehouse  what is it and what is its purpose?

Why are data warehouses databases usually on a separate server from the OLTP database

Star schema design:  fact tables and dimension tables.  What attributes go into the fact table, which go into the dimension table. 
